A different kind of scaling problem arises
when we try to answer queries over a large
number of data sources, but before we do
that let's see how a query is answered in
the virtual data integration setting.
We are going to use a toy
scenario in a medical setting
simple as we have four data sources.
Each with one table for
the sake of simplicity.
Notice that two sources, S1 and
S3, have the same schema.
Now this is entirely possible because
sources may be independent of each other.
Further, there is no guarantee that
they would have the same exact content.
Maybe these two sources represent
clinics at different locations.
So next, we look at the target schema.
For simplicity, let's consider that
it's not an algorithmically creative
probabilistic mediator schema but just a
manually designed schema with five tables.
But while we assume that
the target schema is fixed
we want the possibility that
we can add more sources.
That means more clinics
as the system grows.
Now I'm beginning to
add the schema mapping.
Now there are several techniques
of specifying schema mappings.
One of them is called Local-as-View.
This means we write the relations in each
source as a view over the target schema.
But this way of writing the query,
as we can see here, may seem odd to you.
It's called syntax, but
you don't need to know it.
Just as an example, the first few things
the treats relation in S1 maps to,
so you see that arrow, that means maps to.
So it maps to the query select doctor,
chronic disease from treats patient,
has chronic disease.
Where treatspatient.patient Is equal
to has chronic disease dot patient.
We see the query here in the yellow box.
The only thing we should notice here
is that the select class on the query
has two attributes doctor and
chronic disease which are exactly the same
attributes of the treats relation in S1.
Now let's ask a query that
gives the target schema.
Which doctors are responsible for
discharging patients?
Which translates to
the SQL query shown here.
Now, the problem is how to translate
this query to a query that can
be sent to the sources.
Now ideally this should be simplest query
with no extra operations as shown here.
S3 treats means treats
relation in sources 3.
Now you can see the ideal answer.
To find such an optimal query
reformulation, it turns out that this
process is very complex and becomes
worse as a number of sources increases.
Thus query reformulation
becomes a significant scalability problem
in a big data integration scenario.
Let's look at the second use case
public health is a significant
component of our healthcare system.
Public health systems monitor detect and
take action when epidemics strike.
Not so long ago we have witnessed public
health concerns due to Anthrax virus,
the swine flu and the bird flu.
But these epidemics caused a group
called WADDS to develop a system for
disease surveillance.
This system would connect all local
hospitals in the Washington, DC area, and
is designed to exchange
disease information.
For example, if a hospital lab has
identified a new strain of a virus,
other hospitals and the Centers for
Disease Control, CDC,
in the network,
should be able to know about it.
It should be clear that this needs a data
integration solution where the data
sources would be the labs, the data would
be the lab tests medical records and
even genetic profiles of the virus and
the subjects who might be infected.
The table here shows the different
components with this architecture.
We will just digest the necessary
parts for our requirement.
Just know that RIM which stands for
Reference Information Model is global
schema that this industry has developed
and expects to use as a standard.
Why we want to exchange and combine new
information from different hospitals?
Every hospital is independent and
can implement their own information
system any way they see fit.
Therefore even when there
are standards like HL-7 that
specify what kind of data a held
cache system should have an exchange.
There are considerable variations in
the implementation of the standard itself.
For example the two wide boxes show
a difference in representation
of the same kind of data, this should
remind you of the data variety problem.
Let's say, we have a patient
with ID 19590520 whose lab
reports containing her plasma protein
measurements are required for
analyzing her health condition.
The problem is that the patient
went to three different clinics and
four different labs which all
implement the standards differently.
On top of it?
Each clinic uses its own
electronic medical record system
which we have a very large amount of data.
So the data integration system's job is to
transform the data from the source schema
to the schema of the receiving
system in this case the rim system.
This is sometimes called
the data exchange problem.
Informally a data exchange
problem can be defined like this.
Suppose we have a given database
whose relations are known.
Let us say we also know
the target database's schema and
the constraints the schema will satisfy.
Further we know the desired schema
mappings between the source and
this target schema.
What we do not know is how to populate
the tuples in the target database.
From the tuples in the socialization in
such a way that both schema mappings and
target constraints
are simultaneously satisfied.
In many domains like healthcare,
a significant amount of effort has been
spend by the industry in
standardizing schemas and values.
For example LOINC is a standard for
medical lab observations.
Here item like systolic blood pressure or
gene mutation are encoded in this
specific way as given by this standard.
So, if we want to write that
the systolic/diastolic pressure of
a individual is 132 by 90, we'll not write
out the string systolic blood pressure,
but use the code for it.
The ability to use standard code
is not unique to healthcare data.
The 50 states of the US all
have two letter abbreviations.
Generalizing therefore, whenever we have
data such as the domain is finite and have
a standard set of code available, we give
a new opportunity of handling big deal.
Mainly, reducing the data
size through compression.
The compression refers to a way of
creating an encoded
representation of data.
So that this encoder form is smaller
than the original representation.
A common encoding method is
called dictionary encoding.
Consider a database with 10 million
record of patient visits a lab.
Each record indicates a test and
its results.
Now we show it this way like
in a columnar structure
to make the point that the data is kept
in a column stored relational database
rather than a row store
relational database.
Now consider the column for test code.
Where the type of test is codified
according to the standard.
We replace a string representation
of the standard by a number.
The mapping between
the original test code and
the encoded number are also
stored separately.
Now suppose there
are a total of 500 tests.
So this separate table called
the dictionary here has 500 rows,
which is clearly much smaller
than ten million right?
Now 500 distinct values can be
represented by encoding them in 9 bits,
because 2 to the power of 9 is 512.
Other encoding techniques would be applied
to attributes like date and patient ID.
That's full large data we cannot reduce
the number of total actual rules.
So we have to store all ten million rules.
But we can reduce the amount of space
required by storing data in a column
oriented data store and
by using compression, indeed modern
systems use credit processing algorithms
to operate directly on compress data.
Data compression is an important
technology for big data.
And just like is a set of qualified
terms for lab tests, clinical data
also uses SNOMED which stands for
systematized nomenclature of medicine.
SNOMED is a little more
than just a vocabulary.
It does have a vocabulary of course.
The vocabulary is the collection
of medical terms in human and
medicine to provide codes, terms, synonyms
and definitions that cover anatomy,
diseases, findings, procedures,
micro organisms, substances etcetera.
But it also has relationships.
As you can see,
a renal cyst is related to kidney because
kidney's the finding site of a renal cyst.
If we query against an ontology,
it would look like a graph grid.
In this box,
we are asking to find all patient
findings with a benign tumor morphology.
In terms of querying, we are looking for
edges of a graph where one noticed
the concept that we need to find which is
connected to a node called benign neoplasm
that is benign tumor through an edge
called associated morphology
that applying this query against
the data here produces all benign tumors
of specific organs as you can
see by the orange rounded group.
But now that we have these terms,
we can use these terms to search
outpatient records with these terms would
have been used so
what's the essence of this used case.
This is can shows that an in division
system in a public health domain and
in many other domains must
be able to handle variety.
In this case there's a Global Schema
called RiM shown here all queries and
analyses performed by a data analysts
should be against this global schema.
However, the actual data which is
generated by different medical facilities
would need to be transformed
into data in this schema.
This would require not only
format conversions, but
it would need to respect all constraints
imposed by the source and by the target.
For example, a source may not distinguish
between an emergency surgical procedure
and a regular surgical procedure.
But the target may want to
put them in different tables.
We also saw that
the integration system for
this used case would need to use
quantified data but this gives
us the opportunity to use data compression
to gauge story and query efficiency.
In terms of variety, we saw how
relational data like patient records XML
data like HL7 events, and
graph data like ontologies, are co-used.
To support this, the integration
system must be able to do both model
transformation and query transformation.
Query transformation is the process of
taking a query on the target schema.
Converting it to a query
against a different data model.
For example, part of an SQL query against
the RIM may need to go to snowmad and
hence when you to be converted to
a graph query in the snowmad system.
Model transformation is
a process of taking data
represented in one model
in one source system and
converting it to an equivalent data
in another model the target system.